.\" Hey, Emacs!  This is an -*- nroff -*- source file.
.\" run-mailcap and this manpage were written by Brian White and
.\" have been placed in the public domain (the only true "free").
.\"
.TH RUN-MAILCAP 1 "1st Jan 2008" "Debian Project" "Run Mailcap Programs"
.SH NAME
run-mailcap, view, see, edit, compose, print \- execute programs via entries in the
.I mailcap
file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B run-mailcap
\-\-action=ACTION [\-\-option[=value]]
[MIME-TYPE:[ENCODING:]]FILE [...]

The
.BR see ,
.BR edit ,
.B compose
and
.B print
versions are just aliases that default to the view, edit, compose, and
print actions (respectively).

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B run-mailcap
(or any of its aliases) will use the given action to process each
mime-type/file in turn.  Each file is specified as its mime-type,
its encoding (e.g. compression), and filename together, separated by
colons.  If the mime-type is omitted, an attempt to determine the type
is made by trying to match the file's extension with those in the
.I mime.types
files.  If no mime-type is found, a last attempt will be done by
running the
. B file
command, if available.  If the encoding is omitted, it will also be
determined from the file's extensions.  Currently supported encodings
are
.B gzip
(.gz),
.B bzip2
(.bz2),
.B xz
(.xz), and
.B compress
(.Z).  A filename of "-" can be used to mean "standard input", but
then a mime-type
.B must
be specified.

Both the user's files (~/.mailcap; ~/.mime.types) and the system files
(/etc/mailcap; /etc/mime.types) are searched in turn for information.
.SS EXAMPLES
  see picture.jpg
  print output.ps.gz
  compose text/html:index.htm
  extract-mail-attachment msg.txt | see image/tiff:gzip:-
.SS OPTIONS
All options are in the form --<opt>=<value>.
.TP
.BI \-\-action=<action>
Performs the specified action on the files.  Valid actions are
.IR view ,
.IR cat
(uses only "copiousoutput" rules and sends output to STDOUT) ,
.IR compose ,
.IR composetyped ,
.I edit
and
.IR print .
If no action is specified, the action will be determined by how the
program was called.
.TP
.BI \-\-debug
Turns on extra information to find out what is happening.
.TP
.BI \-\-nopager
Ignores any "copiousoutput" directive and sends output to STDOUT.
.TP
.BI \-\-norun
Displays the found command without actually executing it.
.SH SECURITY
A temporary copy of the file is opened if the file name matches the Perl
regular expresssion "[^[:alnum:],.:/@%^+=_-]", in order to protect from the
injection of shell commands, and to make sure that the name can always be
displayed in the current locale.  In addition, the file is opened using its
absolute path to prevent the injection of command-line arguments, for instance
using file names starting with dashes.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR file "(1)"
.BR mailcap "(5)"
.BR mailcap.order "(5)"
.BR update-mime "(8)"
.SH AUTHOR
.B run-mailcap
(and its aliases) was written by Brian White <bcwhite@pobox.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
.B run-mailcap
(and its aliases) is in the public domain (the only true "free").
